#summary Overview of usage of ruylopez and other tools.

= Introduction =
`ruylopez`, `petroff`, and `polgar` are sequential programs which provide crystal structures for use in `capablanca`.  They are written in C++ using OpenMP.

They have been tested with the Ubuntu (Lucid Lynx and later) and Fedora 11 GNU/Linux operating systems.

= Running `ruylopez` =
Usage is as `ruylopez T N [t p] i` where the options are shown in the following table.  The extension in each dimension is specificed in the configuration file `grain.conf`.
|| Option || Description ||
|| `-c CONFIG.CFG` || specify configuration file ||
|| `T`  || orientation type (0 - fcc; 1 - bcc; 2 - sc) ||
|| `N`  || proportional to number of unit cells per grain ||
|| `-h` || display a help message ||
|| `t`  || angle from _yz_ plane for grain 1 in negative units of pi ||
|| `p`  || angle from _yz_ plane for grain 2 in positive units of pi ||
|| `i`  || relative twist orientation of grains 1 and 2 in units of pi ||

The output file is in the `xyz` file format, which specifies that the number of particles in the file be on the first line with each tab-delimited succeeding line consisting of an identifier and the _x_-, _y_-, and _z_-coordinates of that particle.

The configuration file consists of three lines indicating the number of units extending in the _x_, _y_, and _z_ directions.

= Running `petroff` =
Usage is as `petroff T N` where the options are shown in the following table.  (The spacing in the screw portion is still undesirable.)
|| Option || Description ||
|| `T`  || orientation type (0 - fcc; 1 - bcc; 2 - sc) ||
|| `N`  || number of layers to generate ||
|| `V`  || vacancy defect concentration in units of 1e6 ||

= Running `polgar` =
Usage is as `polgar T x y z p t [V]` where the options are shown in the following table.
|| Option || Description ||
|| `T`  || orientation type (0 - fcc; 1 - bcc; 2 - sc) ||
|| `x`  || extension in _x_ direction ||
|| `y`  || extension in _y_ direction ||
|| `z`  || extension in _z_ direction ||
|| `t`  || angle from _yz_ plane for grain in units of pi ||
|| `p`  || angle from _xy_ plane for grain in units of pi ||
|| `V`  || vacancy defect concentration in units of 1e6 ||